examples/README.md, before:

# Examples

This directory contains practical examples demonstrating various features of llm7shi.

## Quick Start

To run any example:

1. Set your API key(s):
   - Gemini only: `export GEMINI_API_KEY="your-key"`
   - OpenAI compatibility: `export OPENAI_API_KEY="your-key"`
2. Run the example: `uv run examples/[filename].py`

## Example Categories

| Original | Compatibility | Purpose |
|----------|--------------|---------|
| `hello.py` | `compat0.py` | Basic text generation |
| `schema1.py` | `compat1.py` | JSON schema output |
| `schema2.py` | `compat2.py` | Pydantic model output |

The compatibility versions use `llm7shi.compat.generate_with_schema()` to work seamlessly with both Gemini and OpenAI models, while the original versions use Gemini-specific functions. The `compat` module provides optional API abstraction that is kept separate from the core thin wrapper functionality.

### Vendor Prefix Support

The compat examples demonstrate the vendor prefix format for provider selection:

- **Examples use vendor prefix only**: `"openai:"`, `"google:"` (for easier maintenance when default models change)
- **Production use (recommended)**: `"openai:gpt-4.1-mini"`, `"google:gemini-2.5-flash"` (explicit model specification)
- **Legacy format (still supported)**: `"gpt-4.1-mini"`, `"gemini-2.5-flash"`

Note: Examples in this directory use vendor prefix only (imported as `VENDOR_PREFIXES` constant from `llm7shi.compat`) to avoid frequent updates when recommended models change. For production use, explicitly specifying the model name is recommended for reproducible results.

**Implementation example**:
```python
from llm7shi.compat import generate_with_schema, VENDOR_PREFIXES

for model in VENDOR_PREFIXES:  # ["google:", "openai:", "ollama:"]
    generate_with_schema(["Your prompt"], model=model)
```

## Basic Usage

### [hello.py](hello.py) - Basic Text Generation
Simple text generation example showing the most basic usage of the library.

**Documentation**: [hello.md](hello.md)

```bash
uv run examples/hello.py
```

## Structured Output

### [schema1.py](schema1.py) - JSON Schema Example
Demonstrates structured JSON output using manual JSON schema definition with validation.

**Documentation**: [schema1.md](schema1.md)  
**Schema**: [schema1.json](schema1.json)

```bash
uv run examples/schema1.py
```

### [schema2.py](schema2.py) - Pydantic Schema Example
Shows how to use Pydantic models for type-safe schema definition and simpler code.

**Documentation**: [schema2.md](schema2.md)

```bash
uv run examples/schema2.py
```

## Multi-Provider Compatibility

### [compat0.py](compat0.py) - Multi-Provider Hello World
Compatibility version of hello.py that works with both Gemini and OpenAI models.

**Documentation**: [compat0.md](compat0.md)

```bash
uv run examples/compat0.py
```

### [compat1.py](compat1.py) - Multi-Provider JSON Schema
Compatibility version of schema1.py using the same JSON schema with both providers. Demonstrates schema description enhancement for better cross-provider compliance.

**Documentation**: [compat1.md](compat1.md)  
**Schema**: [schema1.json](schema1.json)

```bash
uv run examples/compat1.py
```

### [compat2.py](compat2.py) - Multi-Provider Pydantic Schema
Compatibility version of schema2.py using Pydantic models with both providers. Demonstrates cross-provider schema description enhancement and automatic schema transformation.

**Documentation**: [compat2.md](compat2.md)

```bash
uv run examples/compat2.py
```

### [multiturn.py](multiturn.py) - Multi-Turn Conversation
Demonstrates multi-turn conversations using OpenAI-compatible message format with role-based interactions across all providers.

**Documentation**: [multiturn.md](multiturn.md)

Features:
- OpenAI-compatible message format with roles (`system`, `user`, `assistant`)
- Conversation history support
- System prompt integration within messages
- Automatic role mapping (assistant → model) for Gemini compatibility

```bash
uv run examples/multiturn.py
```

## Advanced Examples

### [essay.py](essay.py) - Automated Essay Evaluation
Demonstrates multi-criteria essay evaluation with dynamic schema generation and cross-model comparison.

**Documentation**: [essay.md](essay.md)  
**Essay**: [essay.txt](essay.txt)

Features:
- Dynamic schema generation from evaluation criteria
- Reasoning-first evaluation approach for better quality
- Schema description independence for multi-provider compatibility
- Multi-model comparison using compat module
- Automatic score calculation and aggregation

```bash
uv run examples/essay.py
```

Commit message:

Update examples to use Ollama by default
Replace iteration over VENDOR_PREFIXES with a single 'ollama:' call in
example scripts to prevent accidental API costs for users. Update
examples/README.md to reflect this change.

examples/README.md, after:

# Examples

This directory contains practical examples demonstrating various features of llm7shi.

## Quick Start

To run any example:

1. Set your API key(s):
   - Gemini only: `export GEMINI_API_KEY="your-key"`
   - OpenAI compatibility: `export OPENAI_API_KEY="your-key"`
2. Run the example: `uv run examples/[filename].py`

## Example Categories

| Original | Compatibility | Purpose |
|----------|--------------|---------|
| `hello.py` | `compat0.py` | Basic text generation |
| `schema1.py` | `compat1.py` | JSON schema output |
| `schema2.py` | `compat2.py` | Pydantic model output |

The compatibility versions use `llm7shi.compat.generate_with_schema()` to work seamlessly with both Gemini and OpenAI models, while the original versions use Gemini-specific functions. The `compat` module provides optional API abstraction that is kept separate from the core thin wrapper functionality.

### Vendor Prefix Support

The compat examples demonstrate the vendor prefix format for provider selection:

- **Examples use vendor prefix only**: `"ollama:"` (uses local Ollama by default to avoid unexpected costs)
- **Production use (recommended)**: `"openai:gpt-4.1-mini"`, `"google:gemini-2.5-flash"` (explicit model specification)
- **Legacy format (still supported)**: `"gpt-4.1-mini"`, `"gemini-2.5-flash"`

Note: Examples in this directory use `"ollama:"` by default. For production use or to use other providers, explicitly specifying the model name is recommended.

**Implementation example**:
```python
from llm7shi.compat import generate_with_schema

generate_with_schema(["Your prompt"], model="ollama:")
```

## Basic Usage

### [hello.py](hello.py) - Basic Text Generation
Simple text generation example showing the most basic usage of the library.

**Documentation**: [hello.md](hello.md)

```bash
uv run examples/hello.py
```

## Structured Output

### [schema1.py](schema1.py) - JSON Schema Example
Demonstrates structured JSON output using manual JSON schema definition with validation.

**Documentation**: [schema1.md](schema1.md)  
**Schema**: [schema1.json](schema1.json)

```bash
uv run examples/schema1.py
```

### [schema2.py](schema2.py) - Pydantic Schema Example
Shows how to use Pydantic models for type-safe schema definition and simpler code.

**Documentation**: [schema2.md](schema2.md)

```bash
uv run examples/schema2.py
```

## Multi-Provider Compatibility

### [compat0.py](compat0.py) - Multi-Provider Hello World
Compatibility version of hello.py that works with both Gemini and OpenAI models.

**Documentation**: [compat0.md](compat0.md)

```bash
uv run examples/compat0.py
```

### [compat1.py](compat1.py) - Multi-Provider JSON Schema
Compatibility version of schema1.py using the same JSON schema with both providers. Demonstrates schema description enhancement for better cross-provider compliance.

**Documentation**: [compat1.md](compat1.md)  
**Schema**: [schema1.json](schema1.json)

```bash
uv run examples/compat1.py
```

### [compat2.py](compat2.py) - Multi-Provider Pydantic Schema
Compatibility version of schema2.py using Pydantic models with both providers. Demonstrates cross-provider schema description enhancement and automatic schema transformation.

**Documentation**: [compat2.md](compat2.md)

```bash
uv run examples/compat2.py
```

### [multiturn.py](multiturn.py) - Multi-Turn Conversation
Demonstrates multi-turn conversations using OpenAI-compatible message format with role-based interactions across all providers.

**Documentation**: [multiturn.md](multiturn.md)

Features:
- OpenAI-compatible message format with roles (`system`, `user`, `assistant`)
- Conversation history support
- System prompt integration within messages
- Automatic role mapping (assistant → model) for Gemini compatibility

```bash
uv run examples/multiturn.py
```

## Advanced Examples

### [essay.py](essay.py) - Automated Essay Evaluation
Demonstrates multi-criteria essay evaluation with dynamic schema generation and cross-model comparison.

**Documentation**: [essay.md](essay.md)  
**Essay**: [essay.txt](essay.txt)

Features:
- Dynamic schema generation from evaluation criteria
- Reasoning-first evaluation approach for better quality
- Schema description independence for multi-provider compatibility
- Multi-model comparison using compat module
- Automatic score calculation and aggregation

```bash
uv run examples/essay.py
```
